---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
---
## Peer Reviewed Publications
### Between altruism and self-aggrandisement: Transparency, accountability and politics in Ghana's oil and gas sector(joint with  Ishmael Ackah, Theophilius Acheampong, Eric Kyem and Gifty Ketemepi ), Energy Research&Social Science, 2020 [Article](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2214629620301134){: .btn--research}

### Re-visiting the renewable energy-economic growth nexus: Empirical evidence from African OPEC countries ( joint with  Oluwafisayo Alabi and Ishmael Ackah), International Journal of Energy Sector Management, 2017 [Article](https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/IJESM-07-2016-0002/full/html){: .btn--research}

### Analysing the efficiency of renewable energy consumption among oil-producing African countries (joint with  Ishmael Ackah  and Oluwafisayo Alabi), OPEC Energy Review , 2016 [Article](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/opec.12081){: .btn--research}

## Working Papers
### Agri-food importing firms amid a health crisis (with [Dela-Dem Doe Fiankor](https://ddfiankor.com) and Christian Ritzel)[Working paper](http://papers.abrahamlartey.com/Fiankor_etal_COVID_agrifood.pdf){: .btn--research} 
This paper exploits daily customs transaction data on the universe of Swiss agri-food importing firms to assess the response of firms to a global shock. Estimating a linear model that regresses product-level import margins on daily COVID19 shocks and a host of fixed effects, we find that the pandemic had a substantial trade-reducing effect on imports. The trade effects were driven mainly by a reduction in the number of importing firms (i.e. 63\% of the total effect), and much less by the number of products imported and the average import value per product per firm. We explore several sources of heterogeneity and show, among others, that larger and incumbent firms were affected more by the trade adjustments.  Our results also reveal that the relative contribution of each import margin to the decline in aggregate imports depends on the level of data aggregation (i.e., daily, weekly or monthly). Finally, we validate and confirm main our findings by testing two mechanisms: (i) third-country supply-side effects using insights from structural gravity models and (ii) changes to consumer demand using consumer mobility, and retailer and consumer scanner data.

### Intensive and extensive margins of manufacturing exports: impact of commodity windfalls [Working paper](http://papers.abrahamlartey.com/Abraham_Lartey_JMP.pdf){: .btn--research} 
How do commodity windfalls affect the number of exporters (extensive margin) and the average export value per exporter (intensive margin) within the manufacturing sector? A large body of theoretical and empirical literature showed that these windfalls could be detrimental to the manufacturing sector, but none untangled the margins through which the exports from the manufacturing sector adjusts to these windfalls. I exploit the exogenous variation in the windfalls generated by the increase in prices of all major commodities during the early 2000s to fill this gap in the literature. First, I find that manufacturing industries that historically had a relatively higher share of exports to value added ratio (more exportable) tend to be negatively affected relative to the other manufacturing industries at both margins. Secondly, the extensive margin is largely driven by entrants. i.e., the number of new exporting firms that enter more exportable industries decline relative to the less exportable industries. Thirdly, for the more exportable industries, the average export value per incumbent exporters industries decline while that of the new exporters increases relative to the less exportable industries.

### International Climate Policy and Renewable Energy Consumption[Working paper](http://papers.abrahamlartey.com/Abraham_Lartey_KP_green_growth.pdf){: .btn--research} 
Has the Kyoto Protocol (KP) induced renewable energy consumption? Increasing the share of renewable energy consumption in final energy consumption is vital for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and thus can contribute to limiting global temperature rise to less than 2°C. In this paper, I examine the causal impact of the KP on renewable energy consumption using the Generalized Synthetic Control Method (GSCM). The GSCM enables me to compare the renewable energy consumption of industrialized countries with what would have happened in the absence of the KP (the counterfactual scenario) whiles allowing for multiple treated units, variable treatment dates and easy inference. I find that the KP led to an increase in renewable energy consumption. This result is robust to the use of the recently developed synthetic difference-in-difference estimator. I also find that the KP increased the likelihood of setting targets on renewable energy, renewable energy research, development \& demonstration, the provision of information and education related to renewable enenrgy, and setting codes and standards.

### Do Natural Resources make countries poor at taxation? [Working paper](http://papers.abrahamlartey.com/Abraham_Lartey_oilgastax.pdf){: .btn--research} 
It has often been argued that countries that produce natural resources mobilize less non-resource tax revenues than other countries. In this paper, I exploit the exogenous variation in the timing of giant oilfield discoveries to estimate the causal impact of natural resources on taxation. The timing of giant oilfield discoveries is arguably exogenous and thus renders them appealing to empirically examine this argument. This allows me to examine the performance of non-resource tax revenue effort before and immediately after discovery as well as the period corresponding to the inflow of revenues from the production. I find that non-resource tax revenues tend to increase in the period following the discovery before the onset of production and after production commences. This effect is due to an increase in non-resource indirect tax revenues. Further analysis shows that both the total and indirect non-resource tax revenues, experience an increase in only low- middle income countries. This effect is largely driven by an increase in the consumption of goods and services.


### Chinese Development Aid and Agricultural Productivity: Evidence from Tanzania  [Working paper](http://papers.abrahamlartey.com/Abraham_Lartey_ChinaAgric.pdf){: .btn--research} [AidData Working paper](https://www.aiddata.org/publications/chinese-development-aid-and-agricultural-productivity-evidence-from-tanzania){: .btn--research} 
Improvement in agricultural productivity plays a key role in the process of economic development. Investment in critical infrastructure has been documented in the literature as one of the pathways to boost agricultural productivity. In this paper, I investigate whether foreign aid aimed at economic and social infrastructure can help improve agriculture productivity in Tanzania. I combine household panel data with rich farm level information with geocoded Chinese development projects. I then exploit the within village level variation in the total number of Chinese financed development projects in a panel fixed effects model to examine their effects on agricultural productivity. I find a positive effect on agricultural productivity in villages that are located within 25 km of these projects. This is largely driven by economic infrastructure. The results are robust to alternative definitions of Chinese financed development projects. I also find that the potential mechanisms driving the results are agricultural commercialization and access to improved seeds. This suggests that these projects connect farmers to input and output markets.


## Permanent Working Papers

### Oil Price Dynamics and Business Cycles in Nigeria: A Bayesian Time Varying Analysis.[Working paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3272841){: .btn--research}

### Dynamics in Economic Diversification in Oil Producing African Countries-Implications for Policy Formulation. [Working paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3129696){: .btn--research}

## Technical Report
### Gender dynamics in cashew and shea value chains from Ghana and Burkina Faso (with Ingram, V. J., Yago-Quattara, E. L., Mogre, D., Wijnands, J., & van den Berg, J.)[Report](https://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/495499){: .btn--research}

## Selected works in progress
### Natural resource contracts in Africa: An empirical analysis (joint with [Flavien Moreau ](https://www.flavienmoreau.com/) and [Antoine Arnoud](https://antoinearnoud.github.io/) )

Agrifood firms  in a crisis (joint with [Dela-Dem Doe Fiankor](https://www.uni-goettingen.de/de/560859.html)

